Okay! We just took a nice in-depth look
at Docker images and how the storage
mechanisms inside of Docker works with
the new layers. Now, all those layers, just
as a reminder, those layers are not
mutable. Meaning that, for the most part
the container, when is it running, it
cannot write out to those. Except for one.
The very last one is allowed to write to
and that's how our database Mongo is
compress the storage because inside the
container that very last layer of
storage is going to be their working and
write out data to it.
So now, I want you to think, what happens
if I bounced that container? What's going to
happen to that layer? It's my data
going to be saved, or will the database be
lost? So, I'm going to go into a little
demonstration and show you exactly what
happens here.
Okay, I'm going to demonstrate to you what
happens with container storage. Now, I have
our Spring Boot Mongo database
application up and running already.
I'm going to toggle over to Chrome, and we
can see that I have a product there
called new product 222.
So, let's go ahead and edit him and
34555. Just a random
number. So now, I can see that he's there
and I am going to go over here and bring
him up so I can still see that 23455 is still there.
Now, come back over here and let's go
ahead and restart this. We're going to
bounce the Spring Boot Application and I
do have a Mongo tailing logs again and
inside of my command window. And we see
that everything's up and happy. Now, let's
take a quick peek here and do a refresh.
And we can see that that product is
still there. So, let's take a look and see
what happens if I restart the container.
So, I'm going to control C out of that.
Let's clear this so I get back up to
the top. docker ps. And what I want to do is
docker stop. And I'm just going to copy this
and paste that. So, I'm pasting in the
container ID and hitting enter. I can
see I have no Docker images running, so
I'm going to hit clear, just to clear the
screens so we don't get a bunch of
commands on it. I'm using the up
arrow to go back through my commands and
I'm going to start this. Now, if I do a
docker ps,
now, I have a new container running.
It's completely different container that
has been started. And this is now
priceless_bartik. So now, if I do docker
logs - f on him
I'm running there and I'm honestly not
sure how the MongoDB container
will or driver will behave. So, let's
refresh this, and the driver did in fact
survive the restart. So, other relational
databases like MySQL or Oracle might be
upset about having the the database
restarted under it and having that
socket connection broken. Mongo
apparently is not. Let's take a quick
peek at the logs. So, we
did get an exception there but it wasn't
a fatal exception. So, MongoDB did recover
from that. So interesting tidbit for me. I
didn't expect that behavior from MongoDB
with us. A nice behavior not to crash the
whole container. But, what does happen
here is, I don't have my products anymore.
So, you can see, I'm on the list function and that
product is not there anymore. So, that's
an important thing so that persisted
data did not make it across the
container restart. Okay, you can see that
the data disappeared. And what happened
was, when the container went down and
came back up, that last layer that we
talked about, that actually got created
again as a new layer and attached to
the container when it started up. So, the
old one went away and a new one was
allocated for the new container, so we
wound up with a blank database. And this
can be a double-edged sword. If you're
not expecting this type of behavior, it
can definitely get you in trouble, where
your persisted data disappears. But,
it also gives us a lot of flexibility as
developers, so we can bring up a
Greenfield Mongo database and not have
to worry about development
wreckage for our test. So, this is an
important feature that we're going to
utilize later in the course, and give us
a lot of flexibility in working with
this. Now, a caveat, I want to point out
about these little detached, or I don't
even say detached, it's not a term I even
introduce you to yet. This layer that
we're writing to, when we drop the
container, that actually sticks around on
the filesystem, and if you're tight on
space, that
really clog up a lot of space on
your filesystem. I was running out on a
small small VM with Docker and used to keep start these up and drop and start them
up and drop them. These little chunks
can really start accumulating space, and
this is on the current flavor a Docker.
I've been working with several releases
up to this. I think around 1.15 now, if I
remember right. The earlier versions did
not clean those up automatically, and it
could lead back a lot of stuff and this
is something to be aware of. Now, is this
something that's going to be changed in future Dockers?
Quite possibly. I don't know that the
long-term plan for this, but I'm making you
aware of it because there are some
commands that we want to utilize to
clean up these effectively orphaned
files that are being left in their file
systems. So, it's like the containers there,
then it went away, but it still leaves a
file in the file system, and after time,
this will accumulate space and
can cause us headaches by running out of
disk space, if we get too many of them
laying around, or if we don't have
adequate disk space. Definitely causes
headaches. Now, the next section, of course,
we can do persistent storage. And what we
need to do is mount out a volume to the
host system. So, this is where the
container is going to interact more with
the host. So, we're going to show you
exactly how to do that, because of course,
we want to be having persistent storage
on our hard disk. We don't want to be
going away and not being able to get
back to it. In fact, I've been developing
with Docker for some time, I have a
development MySQL database, that I
used as my sandbox and I have persistent
storage in there. I can drop this machine.
Reboot it. Bring it completely back up
its OS X so you don't have to reboot very
often. But, when I do that, it's just like
having a normal MySQL database. The data is still
there. Starts back up and everything's
working normally. So, we're going to
get into that exactly how to set that up
in the next section of this course.